Property 'fractional_site_positions' (#206)
Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE: optimade.rst

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Description**: The three lattice vectors in Cartesian coordinates, in ångström (Å).
- **Type**: list of list of floats and/or unknown values
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

>   - **Response**: REQUIRED in the response unless explicitly excluded.

Reviewer: Ah, this is where the line is cut for PR #210. I believe we should attempt to merge this PR before #210 then...

>   - **Response**: REQUIRED in the response unless explicitly excluded, except when property `dimension_types`_ is equal to :val:`[0, 0, 0]` and `fractional_site_positions`_ are not provided (in this case it is OPTIONAL).

Author: > But before we get into rewriting it to be sound logically; as we hande #203, #204, maybe we should not have any requirements like this at all? I.e., should we not simply say that `lattice_vectors` is always required?

We need to account for the case of structures in nonperiodic setting, i.e., when only Cartesian coordinates are available, and lattice vectors do not make sense. But then null vectors could be provided, so it shouldn't be a problem.

>   - **Response**: REQUIRED in the response unless explicitly excluded, except when property `dimension_types`_ is equal to :val:`[0, 0, 0]` and `fractional_site_positions`_ are not provided (in this case it is OPTIONAL).

Author: Made `lattice_vectors` always required in fb7c6f3.

  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL. If supported, filters MAY support only a subset of comparison operators.
  - MUST be a list of three vectors *a*, *b*, and *c*, where each of the vectors MUST BE a list of the vector's coordinates along the x, y, and z Cartesian coordinates.
    (Therefore, the first index runs over the three lattice vectors and the second index runs over the x, y, z Cartesian coordinates).
  - For databases that do not define an absolute Cartesian system (e.g., only defining the length and angles between vectors), the first lattice vector SHOULD be set along *x* and the second on the *xy*-plane.
  - This property MUST be an array of dimensions 3 times 3 regardless of the elements of property `dimension_types`_. The vectors SHOULD by convention be chosen so the determinant of the :property:`lattice_vectors` matrix is different from zero. The vectors in the non-periodic directions have no significance beyond fulfilling these requirements.

>   - If `fractional_site_positions`_ are provided, the vectors in non-periodic directions MUST NOT be expressed as unknown values. Otherwise they MAY be expressed as `[null, null, null]`.

Reviewer 2: Is this maybe a bit too heavy-handed in forbidding `null` values? We are generally very allowing for `null` in cases when, e.g., values are not known. Also, perhaps the text can be slightly more helpful in explaining the interference with `fractional_site_positions`. Here is an attempt:
```suggestion
  - :val:`null` values are allowed in the output. A vector of :val:`[null, null, null]` MAY be used for non-periodic directions where a numerical vector would not be meaningful. However, if the implementation also supports the `fractional_site_positions`_ property, the lattice vectors are relevant also for the non-periodic directions, and thus no all-`null` vectors are expected in the output. 
```

Author: Sounds good, thanks for suggestion.

>   - :val:`null` values are allowed in the output. A vector of :val:`[null, null, null]` MAY be used for non-periodic directions where a numerical vector would not be meaningful. However, if the implementation also supports the `fractional_site_positions`_ property, the lattice vectors are relevant also for the non-periodic directions, and thus no all-`null` vectors are expected in the output. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - :val:`null` values are allowed in the output. A vector of :val:`[null, null, null]` MAY be used for non-periodic directions where a numerical vector would not be meaningful (including a zero vector). However, if the implementation also supports the `fractional_site_positions`_ property, the lattice vectors are relevant also for the non-periodic directions, and thus no all-`null` vectors are allowed in the output.
```

Reviewer: I guess a related question is, why are `null`-vectors necessary, when one can apply zero vectors? Unless zero vectors have a meaning different from `null`-vectors when using `fractional_site_positions`.

  
  - :val:`[[0,0,0],[0,0,2]]` indicates a structure with two sites, one sitting at the origin and one along the (positive) *z*-axis, 2 Å away from the origin.

fractional\_site\_positions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> - **Description**: Positions of each site expressed as fractions of the `lattice_vectors`_. Description of a site matches the one given in `cartesian_site_positions`_.

Reviewer 3: As it is currently formulated, `fractional_site_positions` and `cartesian_site_positions` have different status: `cartesian` is the primary definition, and both `species_at_sites` and `fractional...` refer to `cartesian...`. However, mathematically, `cartesian...` and `fractional...` are equivalent descriptions, and either of them or even both may be absent. It then makes this description ambiguous, since, if `cartesian_site_positions` are absent, it is not clear what the `fractional_site_positions` must match.

It seems therefore that it would be more consistent to describe `species_at_site` as a primary definition of an atomic site, and to let both `fractional_site_positions` and `cartesian_site_positions` refer to the `species_at_site` when the order and number of array elements is defined for each `fractional` and `cartesian`.

- **Type**: list of list of floats and/or unknown values
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

>   - **Response**: OPTIONAL in the response.

Reviewer 3: I suggest specifying that:

```
`fractional_site_positions` and `cartesian_site_positions` MAY be both present in the same response. 
If they are both present, they SHOULD describe the same points in space, i.e. cartesian coordinates 
of sites should be the same as fractional coordinates of the same sites with orthogonalisation 
convention, as expressed in `lattice_vectors`, applied.

cartesian_site_positions[isite][x,y,z] = 
     fractional_site_positions[isite][x,y,z] * latice_vectors[][];

where:
   -  isite is index of the site (isite = 0..length(species_at_site[])-1);
   -  '*' is understood in matrix multiplcation sense;
   - each lattiec_vectors[i] element (i=0..2) is the 
     corresponding lattice vector, \vec{a}, \vec{b} and \vec{c}.
   - both cartesian_site_positions[isite][x,y,z] and
     fractional_site_positions[isite][x,y,z] are row-vectors
     (not column-vectors).
```

  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL. If supported, filters MAY support only a subset of comparison operators.

>   - It MUST be a list of length N times 3, where N is the number of sites in the structure.

Reviewer 3: This is a mistake – both `fractional_site_positions` and `cartesian_site_positions` are **not** lists of N*3 elements, but rather lists of N elements where each element is a list of length 3. Andrius is writing an issue/PR for this fix for `cartesian...`, should be fixed here as well.

Author: Fixed in 03f408838b44184d1be8f1ad9cca9cb19d8f0667 with the same wording as in PR #216.

  - An entry MAY have multiple sites at the same fractional position (for a relevant use of this, see e.g., the property `assemblies`_).
  - If a component of the position is unknown, the :val:`null` value should be provided instead (see section `Properties with unknown value`_).
    Otherwise, it should be a float value.
    If at least one of the coordinates is unknown, the correct flag in the list property `structure_features`_ MUST be set.

>   - The order of the list MUST match the order of `cartesian_site_positions`_.

Reviewer 2: Somehow I managed to submit my review without the comment I had written about this line:

I'd also like the order statement to be as clear as possible.
```suggestion
  - The order of the list MUST match the order of `cartesian_site_positions`_, i.e., the list refers to the same positions as `cartesian_site_positions` *in the exact same order*, only expressed in fractional coordinates instead of cartesian.
```

Author: Agree.

>   - The order of the list MUST match the order of `cartesian_site_positions`_, i.e., the list refers to the same positions as `cartesian_site_positions` *in the exact same order*, only expressed in fractional coordinates instead of cartesian.

Reviewer 3: The order of elements in both `fractional_site_positions` and `cartesian_site_positions` should refer to site descriptions, not to each other; the only suitable property that we specify currently is `species_at_sites`.

- **Examples**:

  - :val:`[[0,0,0],[0.5,0.5,0.5]]` indicates a structure with two sites, one sitting at the origin and one at the center of the unit cell.

nsites
~~~~~~

> - **Description**: An integer specifying the length of :property:`cartesian_site_positions` and  :property:`fractional_site_positions` properties.

Reviewer: As was pointed out by @sauliusg, this should refer instead _only_ to `species_at_sites`.

species\_at\_sites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> - **Description**: Name of the species at each site (where values for sites are specified with the same order of the properties `cartesian_site_positions`_ and `fractional_site_positions`_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Description**: Name of the species at each site (where values for sites are specified with the same order of the properties `cartesian_site_positions`_ as well as `fractional_site_positions`_).
```

I discourage `and`, even though it is correct, simply due to the fuzzyness it may present for an implementer in terms of "should it be the sum of these properties then"?

>   The properties of the species are found in the property `species`_.

Reviewer 3: I suggest that `species_at_sites` are moved to the beginning of the specification, and `fractional_site_positions` and `cartesian_size_positions` should both refer to the `species_at_sites` section.

- **Type**: list of strings.
- **Requirements/Conventions**:
  
  - **Response**: REQUIRED in the response unless explicitly excluded.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL. If supported, filters MAY support only a subset of comparison operators.

>   - MUST have length equal to the number of sites in the structure (first dimension of the list properties `cartesian_site_positions`_ and `fractional_site_positions`_).

Reviewer 3: When `species_at_site` are moved to the front, the `fractional_site_positions` should the refer to `species_at_sites`, not vice versa.

  - **List of strings used to indicate special structure features**:

    - :val:`disorder`: This flag MUST be present if any one entry in the :property:`species` list has a :property:`chemical_symbols` list that is longer than 1 element.

>     - :val:`unknown_positions`: This flag MUST be present if at least one component of the :property:`cartesian_site_positions` and :property:`fractional_site_positions` lists of lists has value :val:`null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - :val:`unknown_positions`: This flag MUST be present if at least one component of the :property:`cartesian_site_positions` or :property:`fractional_site_positions` lists of lists has value :val:`null`.
```
